Okay, so today Nvidia dropped a model
which really is a gamecher and the model
that I'm talking about is the Neotron 3
Nano Omni model. And the key thing with
this model is this is literally taking
some of the best models that they've
released over the last 6 months and
combining them into one model. So, we've
got a base model which was the original
Neotron 3 Nano that was pre-trained on
25 trillion tokens before it even got to
postraining. We've also got in there
their latest vision encoder and the
vision adapter for not only handling
images, but also for being able to
handle video at the same time. And then
on top of that, we've got the Parakeet
audio encoder that they used for a lot
of their really good ASR and voicetoext
streaming models. And what they've
actually done here is they've taken all
of those and put them together in one
model. And that's what this Neotron 3
Nano Omni, and it is a mouthful there,
but it's got quite a lot actually in
there. And this is built for long
context multimodal intelligence for
documents, audio, and visual agents. So
let's roll back a little bit and see how
we actually got here. So to understand
why this matters, you sort of need to
know where it actually came from.
Nvidia's been building out the Neotron 3
family for a while now. There's been the
Nano, which was the 30B with 3B active
text model. There was a super that's
120B model with a million context window
which is really kind of aimed at things
like software cyber security and then
there's the ultra which is still on the
way but they talked about it at GTC this
year. Now what they've done with this
Omni model is they've taken that nano
backbone which was the member
transformer mixture of experts model.
They've dropped in this C radio vision
encoder in here. And they've also
dropped in the Parakeet audio encoder in
there. And remember, Parakeet is what's
been powering their open ASR systems.
And I actually made a video about that
last year. And as they've been rolling
out this Neotron series of models,
they've been talking about getting these
models to actually power things like
Open Core and other agentic systems out
there. If you remember back the actual
super model I think it was was the top
open rating model for pinchbench the
benchmark that actually measured doing
things with open claw and we saw GTC
them then roll out a bunch of different
things around Nemo claw and around the
concept of building agentic apps in
general and this particular model is
built for giving agents these multimodal
abilities in here so we've got real
world document analysis is multiple
image reasoning. So that's where we can
get looking at different images and sort
of talking about them together.
Automatic speech recognition, long audio
and video understanding. And then with
their post training, they've made it so
that even things like agentic computer
use are being supported in here. And
remember, while these components come
from different places, this is not a
suite of models that we're looking at
here. It's one model that does the text,
the images, the video, the audio, all in
one model. Now, while it's true that
we've had proprietary models that can do
these multimodal kind of tasks for a
while, having this in open models is
really recent and in open models where
we've actually got a paper so we
actually know how this whole thing was
put together and the training recipes
with the different components in here.
Well, this is pretty much it. There is
no paper with this kind of detail for
any of the other open models. And I
think this is the key thing that Nvidia
understands is that a lot of
organizations want to use open models,
but what they need actually goes beyond
just open weights. They need to know
what went into the model. They need to
know how the model's going to respond.
And this is where Nvidia's done a really
good job. If we go back to the Neotron 3
Nano, you can actually see in the tech
report that they released, they've got a
full breakdown of what kind of data
actually went into the training mix.
They tell us what languages has been
trained on. They tell us how many tokens
were actually used for pre-training and
then they had a full breakdown of not
only how many examples for supervised
fine-tuning, but what data went into
that supervised fine-tuning. And the
supervised fine-tuning recipes are
really where a lot of this magic is
happening nowadays. So if we jump
forward to the Neotron 3 Omni report, we
can actually see in here that they've
got what they did for the vision
supervised fine-tuning doing the audio
encoder fine-tuning joint omni SFT with
both the vision and audio and then going
into the RL training for text and
reasoning etc. And we can see here
looking at this breakdown, we just don't
get papers that make all of this open
like this. And on top of this, a lot of
the data sets are actually up on hugging
face. Now, why is this important? This
is important because if you're going to
use the model in some kind of use,
whether that's aentic or just for some
kind of LLM applications, especially if
you want to do some kind of fine-tuning,
whether that's perhaps getting the model
to be better at particular kinds of OCR
and stuff like that, you want to read
these recipes to be able to take
advantage of that so that you can get
the best out of the model. So, the model
itself is both up on the Nvidia cloud
where you can actually try it out, but
currently it's actually free on Open
Router. So, what I thought is I would do
a demo of this and then Nvidia has
actually been kind enough to sponsor me
with a DGX Spark and I'll actually show
you how I've been setting up the DGX
Spark to basically just be an LLM server
that's running in my office that allows
me to basically ping it anytime I want
from my main computer without having to
use any of the resources of my main
computer. So, let's jump in and have a
look at some of the demos here. Okay, so
I've put together a collab of where you
can use either the Nvidia version or the
open router version. The open router
version is free, but I don't think it's
fully supporting the audio and the video
in here. So, just come in here and you
can basically pick which version you
want. You will need an API key, of
course. And then you can see we've got
some basic sort of settings here of
where we're going to enable thinking or
not enable thinking. So if we enable
thinking in this case, you will get the
thinking in sort of green here and then
the standard output of what's going on.
We can also actually set a reasoning
budget. So if we want to just determine
the number of tokens that we're going to
set, that's something that we can do
here. And then of course you can
actually have thinking off totally. So
that you just in this case we just get a
standard answer out. You'll notice that
that's a lot quicker. Now if we do give
it something to actually sort of reason
over and we give it a good budget, you
will find that the model actually thinks
for quite a lot. So this is a classic
sort of coin flip thing here where it's
basically getting it to evaluate a bunch
of different things. And you can see
that it will actually do a lot of
thinking as it goes through. And then
finally it'll come through to the end
here where it basically puts this
together. Now the same thing you can do
obviously for no thinking and it will
still put a long answer in there but you
see sure enough we're getting to the
same sort of mapping out. And you will
realize that for certain questions
you're just not going to get as good
quality answers out when you've got the
reasoning either turned off or the
budget too low. All right. If we want to
take an image, just making sure we've
got that image loaded. We can actually
enable thinking and do reasoning over
the actual image. So you can see here
it's basically reasoning over what it's
got in the image tokens and then it
gives us the answer there. The exact
same prompt with no reasoning on it will
just get us to this answer. Now you can
play around with the system prompt. I'll
show you that with the local version in
here. Another thing that you can
actually do is do sort of tool calls
based on an image. So here we're setting
up this tool of capture observation
tool. We're going to pass in a prompt
that we want to basically tell it call
the capture observation tool exactly
once with this modality. If we see this
goes off and sure enough it's got the
image there. It's then able to use that
tool and we can see that that got run.
And if we do that with the thinking on,
we can actually sort of see what's going
on before it comes back with the
structured output from the tool there.
So looking at the same thing running
locally. So this is running locally on
the DGX Spark. You can see that I'm
basically got it on set up so it's on my
local network. It's running the model
using VLM in there and that can handle
things like images, like text in here.
Now, the UI is just a simple gradio app
in here. There's nothing sort of fancy
about that, but it means that we can
give it some nice little sort of
settings of where we can turn the
reasoning on or off. We can show the
reasoning traces if we want to. We can
set the reasoning budget. So, if I set a
bigger reasoning budget, I set something
like this. Let's say I want to do a
typical sort of system prompt. Okay, so
we've got our system prompt there. If I
come in here and I say, tell me about
the best places to live in San
Francisco. We've got pirate mode on with
thinking. So you can see here we're
getting the reasoning out. You can see
the reasoning is basically looking at
our system prompt. And if you come and
look at here, you can see that the
answer we got out has got the reasoning
where it actually talks about replying
like a pirate, right? some uses pirate
language in there. In this case, I can
just hide the reasoning if I want to.
And see, sure enough, I can see the
actual response out there. Now, if we
take something like an audio file, I've
basically put up an audio file here of
just a very short little script. And
just to show you that we can see, you
know, here, this is the actual audio.
>> For me, this podcast is an extension of
the loving community of my YouTube
subscribers. Okay. And you can see that
in the reasoning it actually transcribed
the audio there. So this is exactly what
we had there. And then it uses that to
basically give us our response out in
this case. So the same is true for
images. The same is true for videos in
here. So the cool thing with this is you
see that we're getting a pretty quick
response back from the model. It's not
sluggish at all. And we're not using any
of the resources that are actually on my
main computer because this is basically
just pinging over a local LAN network.
I'm doing the inference on the DGX Spark
and basically just having it send the
tokens back to my computer here. that's
also running with VLLM. So, I don't need
to worry about any issues of things like
Olama not supporting audio or not
supporting the file formats and stuff
like that. Because I'm using the VLM on
the DJX Spark, I'm actually getting a
much better response out here, which in
this particular case, I'm using through
a Gradio interface, but I could also
just be pinging the raw VLM directly
with an agent or a particular app. So
just to wrap up, this model is very good
at anything where you want a general
workhorse that can take in a whole bunch
of different multimodal content, have
the model process that and give it back
to you. It can be really useful if
you're doing something with agents where
you're getting it to scrape pages, take
screenshots of pages, do that kind of
thing, or process videos that you've
downloaded and stuff like that. Now, if
you've got a specific task where you
just want to transcribe a whole bunch of
files or something like that, you
probably would still be better to go for
the parakeet model by itself without
this because you just want the
transcripts in that. Here we can
actually get the transcripts, we can get
that text and we can actually reason
over it to sort of extract different
pieces of information out of it. So
overall, the Neotron 3 Nano Omni is
definitely a step forward for local
models and for being able to have a
model that you can then use with agents
to do multimodal tasks. So check it out
on the API versions. And if you do need
something that's fully local, this model
is small enough for you to be able to
run it. All the versions that I've been
showing you here are the full 16bit
versions. Of course, Nvidia has also
made available an FP8 version and an FP4
version as well as a GGUF version in
here. So, it's great to see that Nvidia
is using obviously a lot of the compute
that they have to make these general
models that then they can make available
for people to use out of the box like
this or to basically fine-tune their own
versions, etc. Anyway, as always, if
you've got questions or comments, please
put them in the comments below. And I
will talk to you in the next video.